[docs] Move SelectUnstyled docs to the Base space (#31816)
mui/material-ui: docs/data/base/components/select/select.md

---
product: base
title: React Select unstyled component and hook
components: SelectUnstyled, MultiSelectUnstyled, OptionUnstyled, OptionGroupUnstyled
githubLabel: 'component: select'
waiAria: https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria-practices/#combobox
packageName: '@mui/base'
---

> # Select

Reviewer: Other pages specify "unstyled" in this header.

```suggestion
# Unstyled select
```

> <p class="description">The SelectUnstyled and MultiSelectUnstyled components let you create menus of options for users to choose from.</p>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<p class="description">The select components allow developers to create menus of options for users to choose from.</p>
```

We are already mentioning below the name of the components, so it's redundant. Also, to keep consistent with other docs pages, I have rephrased a bit.

Author: According to https://github.com/mui/material-ui/pull/31850#discussion_r830077088, "allow" is not the best word to use here. How about "The select components let you create..."

Also, I'm not sure about the word "menus" here. I understand it may be used in a broader sense than "a menu component", but I'm afraid it could confuse developers and make them wonder which component should be used to actually implement a menu control.

{{"component": "modules/components/ComponentLinkHeader.js", "design": false}}

MUI Base offers two components to replace the native HTML `<select>` tag: `SelectUnstyled` and `MultiSelectUnstyled`.

## SelectUnstyled

```tsx
import SelectUnstyled from '@mui/base/SelectUnstyled';
```

> ### Basic usage

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Basic select
```

@danilo-leal was pushing for this format. I like it better too.

{{"demo": "UnstyledSelectSimple.js", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

The `SelectUnstyled` component accepts generic props.
Due to TypeScript limitations, this may cause unexpected behavior when wrapping the component in `forwardRef` (or other higher-order components).
In such cases, the generic argument will be defaulted to `unknown` and type suggestions will be incomplete.

> To avoid this, you can manually cast the resulting component to the correct type (also shown in the demo above):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To avoid this, you can manually cast the resulting component to the correct type:
```

Not relevant in my opinion.

```tsx
const CustomSelect = React.forwardRef(function CustomSelect<TValue>(
  props: SelectUnstyledProps<TValue>,
  ref: React.ForwardedRef<HTMLUListElement>,
) {
  // ...your code here...
  return <SelectUnstyled {...props} ref={ref} />;
}) as <TValue>(
  props: SelectUnstyledProps<TValue> & React.RefAttributes<HTMLUListElement>,
) => JSX.Element;
```

For the sake of brevity, the rest of the demos that follow will not use `forwardRef`.

### Controlled select

`SelectUnstyled` can be used as an uncontrolled (as shown in the demo above) or controlled component.

{{"demo": "UnstyledSelectControlled.js", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

### Object values

> The `UnstyledSelect` component can be used with non-string values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `SelectUnstyled` component can be used with non-string values.
```

Author: whoops! good catch 😄

---
product: base
title: React Select unstyled component and hook
components: SelectUnstyled, MultiSelectUnstyled, OptionUnstyled, OptionGroupUnstyled
githubLabel: 'component: select'
waiAria: https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria-practices/#combobox
---

# Select

> <p class="description">Select components are used for choosing options from a list.</p>

Reviewer: Let's make this more informative, as with the `Modal` page. I'm drawing from [the MDN entry for `<select>`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/select) here:

```suggestion
<p class="description">The `SelectUnstyled` and `MultiSelectUnstyled` components let you create menus of options for users to choose from.</p>
```

{{"component": "modules/components/ComponentLinkHeader.js"}}

> MUI Base offers two components that aim to replace the native `<select>` tag: SelectUnstyled and MultiSelectUnstyled.

Reviewer: Style, and remove the [weasel words](https://www.amanet.org/articles/get-rid-of-those-pesky-weasel-words/).

```suggestion
MUI Base offers two components to replace the native HTML `<select>` tag: `SelectUnstyled` and `MultiSelectUnstyled`.
```

> ## The SelectUnstyled component

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## SelectUnstyled
```
or `Select unstyled`.

Reviewer: I would stick with `SelectUnstyled` (or just SelectUnstyled without the back ticks if we want to avoid those in headers).

```tsx
import SelectUnstyled from '@mui/base/SelectUnstyled';
```

> ### Basic usage

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Basic usage
```

Reviewer 2: These are under the `SelectUnstyled` I believe they should stay as they are.

{{"demo": "UnstyledSelectSimple.js"}}

> The `SelectUnstyled` is a component that accepts generic props.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `SelectUnstyled` component accepts generic props.
```

Reviewer: After reading over this whole section, it seems like it could be a good candidate for a cautionary callout block.

> Due to Typescript limitations, this may cause unexpected behavior when wrapping the component in `forwardRef` (or other higher-order components).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Due to TypeScript limitations, this may cause unexpected behavior when wrapping the component in `forwardRef` (or other higher-order components).
```

In such cases, the generic argument will be defaulted to `unknown` and type suggestions will be incomplete.

> To avoid this, manually cast the resulting component to the correct type (as shown above).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To avoid this, you can manually cast the resulting component to the correct type, as shown in the demo above.
```

> The rest of the demos below will not use `forwardRef` for brevity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the sake of brevity, the rest of the demos that follow will not use `forwardRef`.
```

> ### Controlled select

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Controlled select
```

Reviewer 2: See https://github.com/mui/material-ui/pull/31816/files#r828890197

> The SelectUnstyled can be used as either uncontrolled (as shown in the demo above) or controlled component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`SelectUnstyled` can be used as an uncontrolled (as shown in the demo above) or controlled component.
```

Reviewer: We may want to explicitly state what this terminology means. I don't think I ever encountered it before this. Potential resource to draw from: [What are Controlled Components in React](https://www.robinwieruch.de/react-controlled-components/)

Author: This will likely occur frequently across Base docs, as most of the components can work in either controlled or uncontrolled mode. I don't think we should explain the concept on each page. We could write a few words about it on a page about general unstyled components anatomy instead. What do you think?

Reviewer 4: Good content to be in a Getting Started environment of sorts!

{{"demo": "UnstyledSelectControlled.js"}}

> ### Usage with object values

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Object value
```

> The unstyled select may be used with non-string values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `UnstyledSelect` component can be used with non-string values.
```

{{"demo": "UnstyledSelectObjectValues.js"}}

> ### Customizing the selected value appearance

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Selected value appearance
```

> It is possible to customize the selected value display by providing a function to the `renderValue` prop.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can customize the selected value display by providing a function to the `renderValue` prop.
```

The element returned by this function will be rendered inside the select's button.

{{"demo": "UnstyledSelectCustomRenderValue.js"}}

### Customizing the options' appearance

Options don't have to be plain strings.
You can include custom elements to be rendered inside the listbox.

{{"demo": "UnstyledSelectRichOptions.js"}}

### Grouping

Options can be grouped, similarly to the how the native `select` element works.

> Unlike the native `select`, however, the groups can be nested.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unlike the native `select`, however, groups can be nested.
```

Place the `Option` components inside `OptionGroup` to achieve this.

{{"demo": "UnstyledSelectGrouping.js"}}

> ### Multiselect

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Multiselect
```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## MultiSelectUnstyled
```

> To be able to select multiple options at once, use the `MultiSelectUnstyled` component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `MultiSelectUnstyled` component lets your users select multiple options.
```

```js
import { MultiSelectUnstyled } from '@mui/base/SelectUnstyled';
```

{{"demo": "UnstyledSelectMultiple.js"}}

## The useSelect hook

```js
import { useSelect } from '@mui/base/SelectUnstyled';
```

> If you need to use Select's functionality in another component, you can use the `useSelect` hook.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use the `useSelect` hook to apply the functionality of `SelectUnstyled` to a different component.
```

> It enables maximal customizability at the cost of being lower-level.

Reviewer: Let's try a different way of saying this. I'm not sure if I've completely understood what is implied by it being "lower-level" but here's my crack at it.

```suggestion
This hook gives you the most customization options, but requires more work to implement.
```

---
product: base
title: React Select unstyled component and hook
components: SelectUnstyled, MultiSelectUnstyled, OptionUnstyled, OptionGroupUnstyled
githubLabel: 'component: select'
waiAria: https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria-practices/#combobox
packageName: '@mui/base'
---

# Select

<p class="description">The SelectUnstyled and MultiSelectUnstyled components let you create menus of options for users to choose from.</p>

{{"component": "modules/components/ComponentLinkHeader.js", "design": false}}

MUI Base offers two components to replace the native HTML `<select>` tag: `SelectUnstyled` and `MultiSelectUnstyled`.

## SelectUnstyled

```tsx
import SelectUnstyled from '@mui/base/SelectUnstyled';
```

### Basic usage

{{"demo": "UnstyledSelectSimple.js", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

The `SelectUnstyled` component accepts generic props.
Due to TypeScript limitations, this may cause unexpected behavior when wrapping the component in `forwardRef` (or other higher-order components).
In such cases, the generic argument will be defaulted to `unknown` and type suggestions will be incomplete.

> To avoid this, you can manually cast the resulting component to the correct type, as shown in the demo above.

Reviewer 2: How about we show a short code snippet of this instead of asking developers to open the previous demo?

### Object values

The `UnstyledSelect` component can be used with non-string values.

{{"demo": "UnstyledSelectObjectValues.js", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

### Selected value appearance

You can customize the selected value display by providing a function to the `renderValue` prop.
The element returned by this function will be rendered inside the select's button.

{{"demo": "UnstyledSelectCustomRenderValue.js", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

### Option appearance

Options don't have to be plain strings.
You can include custom elements to be rendered inside the listbox.

{{"demo": "UnstyledSelectRichOptions.js", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

### Grouping options

Options can be grouped, similarly to the how the native `select` element works.
Unlike the native `select`, however, groups can be nested.

Place the `Option` components inside `OptionGroup` to achieve this.

{{"demo": "UnstyledSelectGrouping.js", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

## MultiSelectUnstyled

The `MultiSelectUnstyled` component lets your users select multiple options.

```js
import { MultiSelectUnstyled } from '@mui/base/SelectUnstyled';
```

{{"demo": "UnstyledSelectMultiple.js", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

> ## The useSelect hook

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## The `useSelect` hook
```

?

Reviewer: I think we want to avoid back ticks in headers. At least, I think that's the way it already is elsewhere in the docs. But maybe we don't have a consistent pattern established.

```js
import { useSelect } from '@mui/base/SelectUnstyled';
```

> You can use the `useSelect` hook to apply the functionality of `SelectUnstyled` to a different component.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can use the `useSelect` hook to apply the functionality of the unstyled select components to a different component.
```

It supports the mutli select option, no?

Reviewer: Ah, I guess I assumed based on the name that it specifically referred to the regular select component (as opposed to something like `useMultiSelect`). But that makes sense.
